---
title: "SLEPLET: Slepian Scale-Discretised Wavelets in Python"
tags:
  - manifolds
  - python
  - slepian-functions
  - sphere
  - wavelets
authors:
  - name: Patrick J. Roddy
    orcid: 0000-0002-6271-1700
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Advanced Research Computing, University College London, UK
    index: 1
date: "`r format(Sys.time(), '%d %B %Y')`"
bibliography: paper.bib
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD025 -->

# Summary

Wavelets are widely used in various disciplines to analyse signals both in space
and scale. Whilst many fields measure data on manifolds (i.e., the sphere),
often data are only observed on a partial region of the manifold. Wavelets are a
typical approach to data of this form, but the wavelet coefficients that overlap
with the boundary become contaminated and must be removed for accurate analysis.
Another approach is to estimate the region of missing data and to use existing
whole-manifold methods for analysis. However, both approaches introduce
uncertainty into any analysis. Slepian wavelets enable one to work directly with
only the data present, thus avoiding the problems discussed above. Applications
of Slepian wavelets to areas of research measuring data on the partial sphere
include gravitational/magnetic fields in geodesy, ground-based measurements in
astronomy, measurements of whole-planet properties in planetary science,
geomagnetism of the Earth, and cosmic microwave background analyses.

# Statement of Need

Many fields in science and engineering measure data that inherently live on
non-Euclidean geometries, such as the sphere. Techniques developed in the
Euclidean setting must be extended to other geometries. Due to recent interest
in geometric deep learning, analogues of Euclidean techniques must also handle
general manifolds or graphs. Often, data are only observed over partial regions
of manifolds, and thus standard whole-manifold techniques may not yield accurate
predictions. Slepian wavelets are designed for datasets like these. Slepian
wavelets are built upon the eigenfunctions of the Slepian concentration problem
of the manifold [@Slepian1961; @Landau1961; @Landau1962]: a set of bandlimited
functions that are maximally concentrated within a given region. Wavelets are
constructed through a tiling of the Slepian harmonic line by leveraging the
existing scale-discretised framework [@Wiaux2008; @Leistedt2013]. Whilst these
wavelets were inspired by spherical datasets, like in cosmology, the wavelet
construction may be utilised for manifold or graph data.

To the author's knowledge, there is no public software that allows one to
compute Slepian wavelets (or a similar approach) on the sphere or general
manifolds/meshes. `SHTools` [@Wieczorek2018] is a `Python` code used for
spherical harmonic transforms, which allows one to compute the Slepian functions
of the spherical polar cap [@Simons2006]. A series of `MATLAB` scripts exist in
`slepian_alpha` [@Simons2020], which permits the calculation of the Slepian
functions on the sphere. However, these scripts are very specialised and hard to
generalise.

`SLEPLET` [@Roddy2023a] is a Python package for the construction of Slepian
wavelets in the spherical and manifold (via meshes) settings. In contrast to the
aforementioned codes, `SLEPLET` handles any spherical region as well as the
general manifold setting. The API is documented and easily extendable, designed
in an object-orientated manner. Upon installation, `SLEPLET` comes with two
command line interfaces - `sphere` and `mesh` - that allow one to easily
generate plots on the sphere and a set of meshes using `plotly`. Whilst these
scripts are the primary intended use, `SLEPLET` may be used directly to generate
the Slepian coefficients in the spherical/manifold setting and use methods to
convert these into real space for visualisation or other intended purposes. The
construction of the sifting convolution [@Roddy2021] was required to create
Slepian wavelets. As a result, there are also many examples of functions on the
sphere in harmonic space (rather than Slepian) that were used to demonstrate its
effectiveness. `SLEPLET` has been used in the development of [@Roddy2021;
@Roddy2022; @Roddy2022a; @Roddy2023].

Whilst Slepian wavelets may be trivially computed from a set of Slepian
functions, the computation of the spherical Slepian functions themselves are
computationally complex, where the matrix scales as $\mathcal{O}(L^{4})$.
Although symmetries of this matrix and the spherical harmonics have been
exploited, filling in this matrix is inherently slow due to the many integrals
performed. The matrix is filled in parallel in `Python` using
`concurrent.futures`, and the spherical harmonic transforms are computed in `C`
using `SSHT`. This may be sped up further by utilising the new `ducc0` backend
for `SSHT`, which may allow for a multithreaded solution. Ultimately, the
eigenproblem must be solved to compute the Slepian functions, requiring
sophisticated algorithms to balance speed and accuracy. Therefore, to work with
high-resolution data such as these, one requires high-performance computing
methods on supercomputers with massive memory and storage. To this end, Slepian
wavelets may be exploited at present at low resolutions, but further work is
required for them to be fully scalable.

# Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank Jason D. McEwen for his advice and guidance on
the mathematics behind `SLEPLET`. Further, the author would like to thank Zubair
Khalid for providing his `MATLAB` implementation to compute the Slepian
functions of a polar cap region, as well as the formulation for a limited
colatitude-longitude region [@Bates2017]. `SLEPLET` makes use of several
libraries the author would like to acknowledge, in particular, `libigl`
[@Libigl2017], `NumPy` [@Harris2020], `plotly` [@Plotly2015], `SSHT`
[@McEwen2011], `S2LET` [@Leistedt2013].

# References
